Add missing `DOTNET_` env vars (#26838)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/tools/dotnet-environment-variables.md

---
title: .NET environment variables
description: Learn about the environment variables that you can use to configure the .NET SDK, .NET CLI, and .NET runtime.
ms.date: 11/10/2021
---

# .NET environment variables

**This article applies to:** ✔️ .NET Core 2.1 SDK and later versions

> In this article, you'll learn about the environment variables used by .NET SDK, .NET CLI, and .NET runtime. This article details environment variables prefixed with `DOTNET_`. Use the following environment variables to configure the .NET SDK, .NET CLI, and .NET runtime. Some environment variables are used by the .NET runtime, while others are only used by the .NET SDK, and .NET CLI. Some environment variables are used by all.

Author: Which ones are used by all? I wasn't sure, but I do agree that we should make that clear.

Using TechEmpower benchmarks that generate a lot of small socket reads and writes under a very high load, it was observed that a single socket engine is capable of keeping busy up to thirty x64 and eight ARM64 CPU Cores. The vast majority of real-life scenarios will never generate such a huge load (hundreds of thousands of requests per second)
and having a single producer should be almost always enough. However, to be sure that extreme loads can be handled the `DOTNET_SYSTEM_NET_SOCKETS_THREAD_COUNT` can be used to override the calculated value. When not overridden, the following value is used:

- When `DOTNET_SYSTEM_NET_SOCKETS_INLINE_COMPLETIONS` is `1`, the <xref:System.Environment.ProcessorCount?displayProperty=nameWithType> value is used.
- When `DOTNET_SYSTEM_NET_SOCKETS_INLINE_COMPLETIONS` is not `1`, <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.RuntimeInformation.ProcessArchitecture?displayProperty=nameWithType> is evaluated:
  - When ARM or ARM64 the cores per engine are set to `8`, otherwise `30`.
- Using the determined cores per engine, the maximum value of either `1` or <xref:System.Environment.ProcessorCount?displayProperty=nameWithType> over the cores per engine.

> #### `DOTNET_SYSTEM_NET_DISABLEIPV6`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `DOTNET_SYSTEM_NET_DISABLEIPV6`
```

> The `DOTNET_SYSTEM_NET_DISABLEIPV6` environment variable is used to help determine whether or not Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) is disabled. When `DOTNET_SYSTEM_NET_DISABLEIPV6` is set to either `true` or `1`, IPv6 is disabled unless otherwise specified in the <xref:System.AppContext?displayProperty=nameWithType>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Helps determine whether or not Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) is disabled. When set to either `true` or `1`, IPv6 is disabled unless otherwise specified in the <xref:System.AppContext?displayProperty=nameWithType>.
```

> #### `DOTNET_SYSTEM_NET_HTTP_USESOCKETSHTTPHANDLER`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `DOTNET_SYSTEM_NET_HTTP_USESOCKETSHTTPHANDLER`
```

You can use one of the following mechanisms to configure a process to use the older `HttpClientHandler`:

From code, use the `AppContext` class:

```csharp
AppContext.SetSwitch("System.Net.Http.UseSocketsHttpHandler", false);
```

The `AppContext` switch can also be set by a config file. For more information configuring switches, see [AppContext for library consumers](/dotnet/api/system.appcontext?#appcontext-for-library-consumers).

The same can be achieved via the environment variable `DOTNET_SYSTEM_NET_HTTP_USESOCKETSHTTPHANDLER`. To opt-out, set the value to either `false` or `0`.

### `DOTNET_Jit*` and `DOTNET_GC*`

> There are two stressing-related features for the JIT and JIT generated GC information; JIT Stress and GC Hole Stress. These features provide a way during development to discover edge cases and more "real world" scenarios without having to develop complex applications. The following environment variables are available:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two stressing-related features for the JIT and JIT-generated GC information: JIT Stress and GC Hole Stress. These features provide a way during development to discover edge cases and more "real world" scenarios without having to develop complex applications. The following environment variables are available:
```

- `DOTNET_JitStress`
- `DOTNET_JitStressModeNamesOnly`
- `DOTNET_GCStress`

#### JIT stress

Enabling JIT Stress can be done in several ways. Setting `DOTNET_JitStress` to a non-zero integer value that will generate varying levels of JIT optimizations based on a hash of the method's name or set to a value of two. To apply all optimizations set, `DOTNET_JitStress=2` for example. Another way to enable JIT Stress is by setting `DOTNET_JitStressModeNamesOnly=1` and then requesting the stress modes, space-delimited, in the `DOTNET_JitStressModeNames` variable.

> As an example consider:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an example, consider:
```

#### JIT memory barriers

The code generator for ARM64 allows all `MemoryBarriers` instructions can be removed by setting `DOTNET_JitNoMemoryBarriers` to `1`.

### `DOTNET_RUNNING_IN_CONTAINER` and `DOTNET_RUNNING_IN_CONTAINERS`

The official .NET images (Windows and Linux) set the well-known environment variables:

- `DOTNET_RUNNING_IN_CONTAINER`
- `DOTNET_RUNNING_IN_CONTAINERS`

These values are used to determine when your ASP.NET Core workloads are running in the context of a container.

### `DOTNET_SYSTEM_CONSOLE_ALLOW_ANSI_COLOR_REDIRECTION`

When the <xref:System.Console.IsOutputRedirected?displayProperty=nameWithType> is `true`, to emit ANSI color code set `DOTNET_SYSTEM_CONSOLE_ALLOW_ANSI_COLOR_REDIRECTION` to either `1` or `true`.

### `DOTNET_SYSTEM_DIAGNOSTICS` and related variables

- `DOTNET_SYSTEM_DIAGNOSTICS_DEFAULTACTIVITYIDFORMATISHIERARCHIAL`: To set the default _Activity Id_ format as hierarchical, the should be either `1` or `true`.
- `DOTNET_SYSTEM_RUNTIME_CACHING_TRACING`: When running as Debug, tracing can be enabled when this is `true`.

#### Mono specific variables

> - `DOTNET_DefaultDiagnosticPortSuspend`: Used to configure the runtime to pause during startup, and await for _Diagnostics IPC ResumeStartup_ command from the specified diagnostic port.
> - `DOTNET_DiagnosticPorts`: A value representing the Mono diagnostic ports.
> - `DOTNET_EnableDiagnostics`: When set to `1`, enables Mono diagnostics.
> - `DOTNET_EnableEventPipe`: When set to `1`, enables the Mono event pipe.
> - `DOTNET_EventPipeOutputPath`: The output path for the Mono event pipe.
> - `DOTNET_EventPipeOutputStreaming`: When set to `1`, enables Mono event pipe output streaming.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `DOTNET_DefaultDiagnosticPortSuspend`: Configures the runtime to pause during startup and wait for the _Diagnostics IPC ResumeStartup_ command from the specified diagnostic port.
- `DOTNET_DiagnosticPorts`: A value that represents the Mono diagnostic ports.
- `DOTNET_EnableDiagnostics`: When set to `1`, enables Mono diagnostics.
- `DOTNET_EnableEventPipe`: When set to `1`, enables the Mono event pipe.
- `DOTNET_EventPipeOutputPath`: The output path for the Mono event pipe.
- `DOTNET_EventPipeOutputStreaming`: When set to `1`, enables Mono event pipe output streaming.
```

For more information, see [.NET runtime: Mono diagnostics and tracing](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/docs/design/mono/diagnostics-tracing.md).

## .NET SDK and CLI environment variables

### `DOTNET_ROOT`, `DOTNET_ROOT(x86)`

Specifies the location of the .NET runtimes, if they are not installed in the default location. The default location on Windows is `C:\Program Files\dotnet`. The default location on Linux and macOS is `/usr/share/dotnet`. This environment variable is used only when running apps via generated executables (apphosts). `DOTNET_ROOT(x86)` is used instead when running a 32-bit executable on a 64-bit OS.

### `NUGET_PACKAGES`

The global packages folder. If not set, it defaults to `~/.nuget/packages` on Unix or `%userprofile%\.nuget\packages` on Windows.

### `DOTNET_SERVICING`

Specifies the location of the servicing index to use by the shared host when loading the runtime.

### `DOTNET_NOLOGO`

> Specifies whether .NET welcome and telemetry messages are displayed on the first run. Set to `true` to mute these messages (values `true`, `1`, or `yes` accepted) or set to `false` to allow (values `false`, `0`, or `no` accepted). If not set, the default is `false` and the messages will be displayed on the first run. This flag does not affect telemetry (see `DOTNET_CLI_TELEMETRY_OPTOUT` for opting out of sending telemetry).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifies whether .NET welcome and telemetry messages are displayed on the first run. Set to `true` to mute these messages (values `true`, `1`, or `yes` accepted) or set to `false` to allow them (values `false`, `0`, or `no` accepted). If not set, the default is `false` and the messages will be displayed on the first run. This flag does not affect telemetry (see `DOTNET_CLI_TELEMETRY_OPTOUT` for opting out of sending telemetry).
```

### `DOTNET_DISABLE_GUI_ERRORS`

For GUI-enabled generated executables - disables dialog popup, which normally shows for certain classes of errors. It only writes to `stderr` and exits in those cases.

### `DOTNET_ADDITIONAL_DEPS`

Equivalent to CLI option `--additional-deps`.

### `DOTNET_RUNTIME_ID`

Overrides the detected RID.

### `DOTNET_SHARED_STORE`

Location of the "shared store" which assembly resolution falls back to in some cases.

### `DOTNET_STARTUP_HOOKS`

List of assemblies to load and execute startup hooks from.

### `DOTNET_BUNDLE_EXTRACT_BASE_DIR`

Specifies a directory to which a single-file application is extracted before it is executed. **Available starting with .NET Core 3.x.**

For more information, see [Single-file executables](../whats-new/dotnet-core-3-0.md#single-file-executables).

### `DOTNET_CLI_CONTEXT_*`

- `DOTNET_CLI_CONTEXT_VERBOSE`: To enable a verbose context, set to `true`.

> - `DOTNET_CLI_CONTEXT_ANSI_PASS_THRU`: To enable a ANSI pass thru, set to `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `DOTNET_CLI_CONTEXT_ANSI_PASS_THRU`: To enable an ANSI pass-through, set to `true`.
```

### `DOTNET_CLI_WORKLOAD_UPDATE_NOTIFY_DISABLE`

Disables background download of advertising manifests for workloads. Default is `false` - not disabled. If set to `true`, downloading is disabled. For more information, see [Advertising manifests](dotnet-workload-install.md#advertising-manifests).

### `DOTNET_CLI_WORKLOAD_UPDATE_NOTIFY_INTERVAL_HOURS`

Specifies the minimum number of hours between background downloads of advertising manifests for workloads. Default is `24` - no more frequently than once a day. For more information, see [Advertising manifests](dotnet-workload-install.md#advertising-manifests).

### `COREHOST_TRACE`

Controls diagnostics tracing from the hosting components, such as `dotnet.exe`, `hostfxr`, and `hostpolicy`.

* `COREHOST_TRACE=[0/1]` - default is `0` - tracing disabled. If set to `1`, diagnostics tracing is enabled.

> * `COREHOST_TRACEFILE=<file path>` - only has effect if tracing is enabled via `COREHOST_TRACE=1`. When set, the tracing information is written to the specified file, otherwise, the trace information is written to `stderr`. **Available starting with .NET Core 3.x.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `COREHOST_TRACEFILE=<file path>` - has an effect only if tracing is enabled by setting `COREHOST_TRACE=1`. When set, the tracing information is written to the specified file; otherwise, the trace information is written to `stderr`. **Available starting with .NET Core 3.x.**
```

If set to `true`, invoking `dotnet` won't produce a warning when a preview SDK is being used.

### `DOTNET_WATCH_*`

The following .NET watch settings are available as environment variables:

- `DOTNET_WATCH`: The `dotnet watch` command sets this variable to `1` on all child processes launched.
- `DOTNET_WATCH_ITERATION`: The `dotnet watch` command sets this variable to `1` and increments by one each time
  a file is changed and the command is restarted.
- `DOTNET_WATCH_SUPPRESS_STATIC_FILE_HANDLING`: If set to `1`, or `true`, `dotnet watch` will _not_ perform special handling for static content file.
- `DOTNET_WATCH_SUPPRESS_MSBUILD_INCREMENTALISM`: By default, `dotnet watch` optimizes the build by avoiding certain operations such as running `restore` or re-evaluating the set of watched files on every file change. If set to `1` or `true`, these optimizations are disabled.
- `DOTNET_WATCH_SUPPRESS_LAUNCH_BROWSER`: The `dotnet watch run` command will attempt to launch browsers for web apps with `launchBrowser` configured in the _launchSettings.json_ file. If set to `1` or `true`, this behavior is suppressed.
- `DOTNET_WATCH_SUPPRESS_BROWSER_REFRESH`

> - `DOTNET_WATCH_AUTO_RELOAD_WS_HOSTNAME`: As part of `dotnet watch`, the browser refresh server mechanism reads this value to determine the WebSocket host environment. The value `127.0.0.1` is replaced by `localhost`, and the `http://` and `https://` schemes are replaced with `ws://` and `wss://` respectfully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `DOTNET_WATCH_AUTO_RELOAD_WS_HOSTNAME`: As part of `dotnet watch`, the browser refresh server mechanism reads this value to determine the WebSocket host environment. The value `127.0.0.1` is replaced by `localhost`, and the `http://` and `https://` schemes are replaced with `ws://` and `wss://` respectively.
```

- `DOTNET_HOTRELOAD_NAMEDPIPE_NAME`: This value is configured by `dotnet watch` when the app is to be launched, and it specifies the named pipe.

For more information, see [GitHub: .NET SDK dotnet-watch](https://github.com/dotnet/sdk/blob/main/src/BuiltInTools/dotnet-watch/README.md).

#### `DOTNET_USE_POLLING_FILE_WATCHER`

> When set to `1` or `true`, `dotnet watch` will poll the file system for changes. This is required for some file systems, such as network shares, Docker mounted volumes, and other virtual file systems. The <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.FileProviders.PhysicalFileProvider> uses the `DOTNET_USE_POLLING_FILE_WATCHER` to determine whether to the <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.FileProviders.PhysicalFileProvider.Watch%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> will rely on the <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.FileProviders.Physical.PollingFileChangeToken>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When set to `1` or `true`, `dotnet watch` will poll the file system for changes. This is required for some file systems, such as network shares, Docker mounted volumes, and other virtual file systems. The <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.FileProviders.PhysicalFileProvider> class uses `DOTNET_USE_POLLING_FILE_WATCHER` to determine whether the <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.FileProviders.PhysicalFileProvider.Watch%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> method will rely on the <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.FileProviders.Physical.PollingFileChangeToken>.
```

### Configure MSBuild in the .NET CLI

> To execute MSBuild out-of-process, set the `DOTNET_CLI_RUN_MSBUILD_OUTOFPROC` environment variable to either `1`, `true`, or `yes`. By default, MSBuild will execute in-proc. To force MSBuild to use an external working node long-living process for building projects, set `DOTNET_CLI_USE_MSBUILDNOINPROCNODE` to either `1`, `true`, or `yes`. This will set the `MSBUILDNOINPROCNODE` environment variable to `1`, which is referred to as _MSBuild Server V1_ as the entry process forwards most of the work to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To execute MSBuild out-of-process, set the `DOTNET_CLI_RUN_MSBUILD_OUTOFPROC` environment variable to either `1`, `true`, or `yes`. By default, MSBuild will execute in-proc. To force MSBuild to use an external working node long-living process for building projects, set `DOTNET_CLI_USE_MSBUILDNOINPROCNODE` to `1`, `true`, or `yes`. This will set the `MSBUILDNOINPROCNODE` environment variable to `1`, which is referred to as _MSBuild Server V1_, as the entry process forwards most of the work to it.
```

#### `DOTNET_MSBUILD_SDK_RESOLVER_*`

> These are overrides that are used to force the resolved SDK tasks and targets to come from a given base directory and report a given version to MSBuild, which may be `null` if unknown. One key use case for this is to test SDK tasks and targets without deploying them inside the .NET Core SDK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are overrides that are used to force the resolved SDK tasks and targets to come from a given base directory and report a given version to MSBuild, which may be `null` if unknown. One key use case for this is to test SDK tasks and targets without deploying them by using the .NET Core SDK.
```

- `DOTNET_MSBUILD_SDK_RESOLVER_SDKS_DIR`: Overrides the .NET SDK directory.
- `DOTNET_MSBUILD_SDK_RESOLVER_SDKS_VER`: Overrides the .NET SDK version.
- `DOTNET_MSBUILD_SDK_RESOLVER_CLI_DIR`: Overrides the _dotnet.exe_ directory path.

### `DOTNET_NEW_PREFERRED_LANG`

> To configure the default programming language when using the `dotnet new` command, if the `-lang|--language` switch is omitted the default value of `C#` is used. This can be overridden by setting the `DOTNET_NEW_PREFERRED_LANG` to any of the valid values; `C#`, `F#`, or `VB`. For more information, see [dotnet new](dotnet-new.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configures the default programming language for the `dotnet new` command when the `-lang|--language` switch is omitted. The default value is `C#`. Valid values are `C#`, `F#`, or `VB`. For more information, see [dotnet new](dotnet-new.md).
```
